Corporate governance strategies employed by firms that are ethical, societally friendly, and beneficial to its community

Over 1.8 million professionals use CFI to learn accounting, financial analysis, modeling and more. Start with a free account to explore 20+ always-free courses and hundreds of finance templates and cheat sheets.

Start Free
Written by CFI Team
What is Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR)?
Corporate social responsibility (CSR) refers to strategies that companies put into action as part of corporate governance that are designed to ensure the company’s operations are ethical and beneficial for society.

Corporate Social Responsibility (CSR) - Image of company employees picking trash together

Categories of CSR
Although corporate social responsibility is a very broad concept that is understood and implemented differently by each firm, the underlying idea of CSR is to operate in an economically, socially, and environmentally sustainable manner.

Generally, corporate social responsibility initiatives are categorized as follows:

1. Environmental responsibility
Environmental responsibility initiatives aim to reduce pollution and greenhouse gas emissions and the sustainable use of natural resources.

2. Human rights responsibility
Human rights responsibility initiatives involve providing fair labor practices (e.g., equal pay for equal work) and fair trade practices, and disavowing child labor.

3. Philanthropic responsibility
Philanthropic responsibility can include things such as funding educational programs, supporting health initiatives, donating to causes, and supporting community beautification projects.

4. Economic responsibility
Economic responsibility initiatives involve improving the firm’s business operation while participating in sustainable practices – for example, using a new manufacturing process to minimize wastage.

Business Benefits of CSR
In a way, corporate social responsibility can be seen as a public relations effort. However, it goes beyond that, as corporate social responsibility can also boost a firm’s competitiveness. The business benefits of corporate social responsibility include the following:

1. Stronger brand image, recognition, and reputation
CSR adds value to firms by establishing and maintaining a good corporate reputation and/or brand equity.

2. Increased customer loyalty and sales
Customers of a firm that practices CSR feel that they are helping the firm support good causes.

3. Operational cost savings
Investing in operational efficiencies results in operational cost savings as well as reduced environmental impact.

4. Retaining key and talented employees
Employees often stay longer and are more committed to their firm knowing that they are working for a business that practices CSR.

5. Easier access to funding
Many investors are more willing to support a business that practices CSR.

6. Reduced regulatory burden
Strong relationships with regulatory bodies can help to reduce a firm’s regulatory burden.

Example of CSR in Canada
In Canada, mining companies often engage with Aboriginal communities and groups. Converting land sites into mines can cause a significant environmental impact on the Aboriginal communities living near the sites. Several Canadian mining companies engage in corporate social responsibility with local communities to ensure that the adverse effects are minimized.

For example:

Cameco Corporation oversees education programs directed toward northern and Aboriginal peoples through their northern Saskatchewan five-pillar strategy.
Goldcorp Inc. strives to make a positive impact on its communities by supporting education and health initiatives and sponsorship of special events.
Softrock Minerals Ltd. contributes money for festivals, schools, and projects.
CSR of Starbucks
Starbucks is a well-known firm that practices corporate social responsibility. As indicated by the company: “Starbucks’ social corporate responsibility and sustainability is about being responsible and doing things that are good for the planet and each other.”

Starbucks’ CSR initiatives include:

Starbucks Youth Action Grants: Awarding grants to inspire and support youth action
Ethos Water Fund: Raising clean water awareness and providing children with access to clean water
Ethical Sourcing: Commitment to buying and serving ethically traded coffee
Green Building: Using the U.S. Green Building Council’s LEED certification program to create energy and water-efficient store designs